Habits are strange contradictory things: they are human-made nature, or, more broadly, culture become (second-) nature.
They are practices acquired through time that are seemingly forgotten as they move from the voluntary to the involuntary, the conscious to the automatic.
As they do so, they penetrate and define a person, a body, and a grouping of bodies. To outline some of the contradictions habits embody (and habits are about embodiment):
they are mechanical and creative; individual and collective; human and nonhuman; inside and outside; irrational and necessary.10(
Habits are both inflexible and creative. According to psychologist Wendy Wood, habits are voluntary actions initially taken on to achieve a goal; these actions, however, soon become autonomous programs.11 As “memory chunks,” habits are inflexible. Whereas a goal, such as weight loss, may be satisfied in many ways, there is only one way to satisfy a habit: doing it. This possible divergence of habits from goals can make habits, Wood argues, “vestige[s] of past goal pursuit.”12 At the same time, the involuntary nature of habit—its seemingly mechanical repetition of the same—combined with its tendency to wander, makes creativity and rational thought possible. According to Elizabeth Grosz, habit, in the work of Gilles Deleuze, Félix Ravaisson and Henri Bergson “is regarded not as that which reduces the human to the order of the mechanical... but rather as a fundamentally creative capacity that produces the possibility of stability in a universe in which change is fundamental. Habit is a way in which we can organize lived regularities, moments of cohesion and repetition, in a universe in which nothing truly repeats.”Habit enables stability, which in turn gives us the time and space needed to be truly creative: without habit there could be no thinking, no creativity and no freedom.14 Further, habit, as a form of second nature, reveals the power of humans to create new structures and reactions in response to their environment; it is, as Catherine Malabou argues, a sign of their plasticity.Habit, unlike instinct, is learned: it is evidence of culture in the strongest sense of the word. Moreover, habit itself is creative. As David Hume has observed, habit can create fanciful relations between things by invoking false experiences. (
This creative accrual of habit is central to personality, to subjectivity (or the lack thereof), and to ideology. Maurice Merleau-Ponty has argued, “my own
body... is my basic habit;”Gilles Deleuze has similarly argued, “we are habits, nothing but habits—the habit of saying ‘I.’”18 Drawing from this work, Claire Carlisle has argued that habits, defined as what one has, conceal the fundamental emptiness of the self.Habit, of course, is also a literal covering, and the nun’s habit reveals that, even as habit covers and fits an individual, it also links bodies together.
According to Gabriel Tarde, this link happens at a level beneath rationality and consciousness: modern man is a somnambulist who is linked to others through habit.This link has been traditionally linked to class formation, most clearly in Pierre Bourdieu’s work on habitus. Habitus, as the “generative
